\documentclass{article}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
  \usepackage{eurosym}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{mathspec}
  \else
    \usepackage{fontspec}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Ligatures=TeX,Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \newcommand{\euro}{€}
\fi
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{%
\usepackage{microtype}
\UseMicrotypeSet[protrusion]{basicmath} % disable protrusion for tt fonts
}{}
\usepackage[margin=1in]{geometry}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\hypersetup{unicode=true,
            pdftitle={Status of Fisheries in Jordan},
            pdfborder={0 0 0},
            breaklinks=true}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls
\usepackage{longtable,booktabs}
\usepackage{graphicx,grffile}
\makeatletter
\def\maxwidth{\ifdim\Gin@nat@width>\linewidth\linewidth\else\Gin@nat@width\fi}
\def\maxheight{\ifdim\Gin@nat@height>\textheight\textheight\else\Gin@nat@height\fi}
\makeatother
% Scale images if necessary, so that they will not overflow the page
% margins by default, and it is still possible to overwrite the defaults
% using explicit options in \includegraphics[width, height, ...]{}
\setkeys{Gin}{width=\maxwidth,height=\maxheight,keepaspectratio}
\IfFileExists{parskip.sty}{%
\usepackage{parskip}
}{% else
\setlength{\parindent}{0pt}
\setlength{\parskip}{6pt plus 2pt minus 1pt}
}
\setlength{\emergencystretch}{3em}  % prevent overfull lines
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}
\setcounter{secnumdepth}{0}
% Redefines (sub)paragraphs to behave more like sections
\ifx\paragraph\undefined\else
\let\oldparagraph\paragraph
\renewcommand{\paragraph}[1]{\oldparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi
\ifx\subparagraph\undefined\else
\let\oldsubparagraph\subparagraph
\renewcommand{\subparagraph}[1]{\oldsubparagraph{#1}\mbox{}}
\fi

%%% Use protect on footnotes to avoid problems with footnotes in titles
\let\rmarkdownfootnote\footnote%
\def\footnote{\protect\rmarkdownfootnote}

%%% Change title format to be more compact
\usepackage{titling}

% Create subtitle command for use in maketitle
\newcommand{\subtitle}[1]{
  \posttitle{
    \begin{center}\large#1\end{center}
    }
}

\setlength{\droptitle}{-2em}
  \title{Status of Fisheries in Jordan}
  \pretitle{\vspace{\droptitle}\centering\huge}
  \posttitle{\par}
  \author{}
  \preauthor{}\postauthor{}
  \date{}
  \predate{}\postdate{}


\begin{document}
\maketitle

\section{Summary}\label{summary}

The majority of the commercial fish catch in Jordanian fisheries is made
up of tuna, swordfish, and sardines. These migratory, pelagic species
are unlikely to have built a separate population in Jordan or the Gulf
of Aqaba and are most likely part of the broader Indian Ocean stocks.
While the swordfish stock in the Indian Ocean is not currently
over-fished, no stock assessments exist for the other major species.

In contrast, the reef fish species, which make up only a small part of
the catch, have likely formed a separate local population. Although more
comprehensive and detailed data is necessary to estimate the stock size
and stock status for these species, first investigations from surveys
show that important indicator species are heavily over-fished and that
the stocks are nearly depleted. This conclusion is supported by the
finding that more than A¼ of the fishing trips are ended without any
catch.

\subparagraph{Page Break}\label{page-break}

\section{Acknowledgment}\label{acknowledgment}

\subparagraph{Page Break}\label{page-break-1}

\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}

\subsection{Literature Review}\label{literature-review}

\subsubsection{The Fishery Status in Jordan's Gulf of Aqaba --- Mohammad
Al-Zibdah, Maroof Khalaf, and Nidal
Odat}\label{the-fishery-status-in-jordans-gulf-of-aqaba-mohammad-al-zibdah-maroof-khalaf-and-nidal-odat}

This study collected data from July 1999 to June 2000 on fish size and
composition as well as the gear used and effort expended. Data was
collected through government resources along with interviews and direct
measurements with fishers. This data was then supplemented by Ministry
of Agriculture documents from previous years on catch sizes. While 153
metric tons of fish were recorded for the period in question, the
researchers found that the catch size would fluctuate by as much as 100
metric tons per year historically. Much of this fluctuation can be
explained by non-environmental factors like stricter border control and
the banning of dynamite for fishing, but heavy over-exploitation was
observed for most species outside of tuna. Fishing trips would begin in
the early morning around sunrise and end when either the fishers were
satisfied with the catch or at sunset. Boats mostly remained along the
north coastline and in Al-Mamlah Bay, where the Gulf has a biotic soft
floor or seagrass beds. Deep sea fishing in the summer. The number of
trips would increase in the winter when tuna populations were at their
peak; in the summer catches mostly consisted of deep sea fishing for
commercial species. Fishers do not utilize shellfish and other
invertebrate species in the area. The Researchers found that only 60\%
fishers licensed in the area actually fished, possibly because the
shallow water and complex topography of the ocean floor make fishing
difficult in the area. The researchers also calculated CPUE, or catch
per unit effort, a measure of how much fish is caught per trip.

\(\text{CPUE} = \frac{\text{CA}_m}{T_m * B_y}\) Where \(\text{CA}_m\) is
the catch in Kg per month, \(T_m\) is the average number of trips per
boat per month, and \(B_y\) is the average number of active boats per
month.

\subsubsection{Fishery Status, Growth, Reproduction Biology and Feeding
Habit of Two Scombrid Fish from the Gulf of Aqaba, Red Sea (2007) ---
Mohammad Al-Zibdah and Nidal
Odat}\label{fishery-status-growth-reproduction-biology-and-feeding-habit-of-two-scombrid-fish-from-the-gulf-of-aqaba-red-sea-2007-mohammad-al-zibdah-and-nidal-odat}

Zibdah and Odat used surveys and physical analysis to determine the
characteristics of two important fish species in the Gulf of Aqaba:
\emph{Katsuwonus pelamis} (Skipjack Tuna, \emph{Arabic Name}) and
\emph{Euthnnys affinis} (mackerel tuna, \emph{Arabic Name}.) They found
that these two species together make up about 60\% of the total catch
from Aqaba and that the Scombridae family in general made up 91\% of the
catch from about 50 trips each day. Catch totals were estimated from
monthly records kept by authorities. Some of the catch of each species
was also analyzed by the researchers to determine physical and
behavioral characteristics. Physical characteristics of the fish
indicated that only mature fish migrated into the area and that the
quality and abundance of food were inadequate. The bulk of each species'
consumption comes from other small fish, often \emph{Atherinomorus
lacunosus}. The rates of mortality revealed that both species are being
heavily exploited by fishers, at roughly equal rates. Movement patterns
also indicated that the population crosses international boundaries,
making proper management between countries vital to ensure the
sustainability of the fishery.

\subsubsection{Fish Fauna of the Jordanian Coast, Gulf of Aqaba, Red Sea
(2004) --- Maroof
Khalaf}\label{fish-fauna-of-the-jordanian-coast-gulf-of-aqaba-red-sea-2004-maroof-khalaf}

Khalaf aimed to take an inventory of the fish present in the Gulf of
Aqaba and display the diversity found in the region. This study found a
total of 507 fish species belonging to 109 families, 65 of which
(12.8\%) were endemic to the Gulf. Inventories were obtained from 4
sources: species collected or deposited at the Marine Science Station in
Aqaba, the collection of the Sencknberg Museum Frankfurt, the catch of
fishers between 1995 and 2002, and previous species reported in
literature about the Gulf. Fish were photographed and measured by marine
station staff, both after being caught and in their habitats during a
visual census. The Gulf showed a high level of diversity despite its
small size, potentially due to the presence of various environments like
sandy flats, coral reefs, and seagrass meadows. 51\% of the species
lived in coral and boulders while 8.3\% lived in the sea grass. Two
species had also migrated into the Gulf from the Mediterranean Sea, and
three invasive species were observed from inland aquaculture projects.
In total, 76 species were identified as present in the Gulf for the
first time.

\subsubsection{Fish Assemblages in seagrass habitat along the Jordanian
coast of the Gulf of Aqaba (2012) --- Maroof A. Khalaf, Saber Al-Rousan,
Fuad A.
Al-Horani}\label{fish-assemblages-in-seagrass-habitat-along-the-jordanian-coast-of-the-gulf-of-aqaba-2012-maroof-a.-khalaf-saber-al-rousan-fuad-a.-al-horani}

This study surveyed three seagrass meadows in the Gulf of Aqaba,
identified as the â\euro{}Hotels Area,â\euro{}™ â\euro{}Phosphate
Loading Berth,' and â\euro{}Tala Bay.â\euro{}™ Of 507 total species
known in the Gulf of Aqaba, 132 species (26\%) were identified in these
seagrass areas. 19.7\% of these species were from the family Labridae,
and 8.33\% were Pomacentridae, with the top 8 families making up 56.82\%
of species. In total, 37,034 fish were counted, with Lethrinidae making
up 30.5\%, Pomacentridae 28.7\%, Serranidae 15.4\%, and the top 7
families total making up 90.0\%. The study also found that seagrass acts
as a nursery for the fish and that when there is more coral cover, more
species inhabit the seagrass.

\subsubsection{FAO Jordan Fishery Report
(2003)}\label{fao-jordan-fishery-report-2003}

The UN Food and Agriculture Organization prepared a report in 2003 on
the structure and prospects of the fishing industry in Jordan. The FAO
found 85 fishermen employed on 40 boats, with a total catch from 2001 of
170t. Of the 2001 catch, 65\% were tuna. The organization also found
that the number of fishers had been static in over a period of years,
and that developmental prospects were very limited. In 2003 domestic
fishing made up a small portion of Jordanian fish consumption, at around
2\%, with the vast majority coming from imports. The FAO also found
limited management measures for fisheries in Jordan despite some
limitations on fishing methods. Because the important commercial species
in Jordan extend beyond Jordanian borders, the FAO recommends regional
cooperation for marine environmental management.

\subsection{The Gulf of Aqaba; an
Overview}\label{the-gulf-of-aqaba-an-overview}

\subsubsection{Location}\label{location}

The Gulf of Aqaba is a semi-enclosed water basin in the Middle East,
extending from the northern tip of the Red Sea. It connects to the Red
Sea through the Straits of Tiran, between Sinai and Tiran Island. It is
opposite the Gulf of Suez, across the Sinai Peninsula. The Gulf borders
four countries: Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Israel, and Egypt through the
Sinai Peninsula. The Gulf of Aqaba is Jordan's only access to the ocean,
as well as Israel's only access to the Red Sea. As such, the cities of
Aqaba and Eilat (in Jordan and Israel respectively) occupy roles as
important port cities. Other minor port cities also exist, like Taba in
Egypt and Haql in Saudi Arabia.

The Gulf of Aqaba has a length of 170km, with an average width of 15km
and an average depth of 800m (maximum depth 1800m.) The Jordanian
coastline extends for about 27km along the Gulf. It consists of a series
of embayments with a broad range of communities present in each,
including rocky shore, reef flat, reef face, fore reef, sandy shore,
sandy bottom and sea grass ecosystems (Tellawi 2001). The Gulf's
ecological importance stems from its location as a bridge between Africa
and Eurasia.

\subsubsection{Climate}\label{climate}

\subsubsection{Sea Characteristics}\label{sea-characteristics}

The Gulf of Aqaba is marked by a relative lack of stormy weather, which
along with mild water currents and relatively high salinity levels,
provides a suitable environment for the growth of corals and countless
varieties of marine-life forms. The water of the Jordanian coastline is
clear, with high transparency and little wave action throughout the
year. The poor freshwater influx has led to a poor supply of minerals
salts and nutrients such as nitrogen or phosphorus compounds which left
planktonic primary production very low. This characteristic is supported
by a water temperature ranging from 21A°C in winter to 27A°C in summer;
shallow coastal areas may reach as high as 29 A°C during the warm
months.

\subsubsection{Species Diversity}\label{species-diversity}

Between 161 (Tellawi 2001) and 507 (M. Khalaf 2004) different species of
fish have been documented in the Jordanian part of the Gulf of Aqaba.
These include species with possible local populations (e.g.~groupers and
lionfish) as well as migratory species such as tuna and swordfish. Most
of the fish species present in Jordan (82.8\%) are associated with
benthic habitats such as corals and rocks (M. Khalaf 2004).

Sound data on the status of the fish stocks in Jordan has been mostly
unavailable. While some investigations have been made (Al-Zibdah and
Odat 2007), no comprehensive stock assessments have been provided.

\subsection{Current status of fishing at
Aqaba}\label{current-status-of-fishing-at-aqaba}

\subsubsection{ASEZA establishment}\label{aseza-establishment}

The Aqaba Special Economic Zone Authority was established in 2001 to
promote investment and tourism in the Aqaba area. ASEZA was created to
provide certain tax incentives and spur development, and consequently,
many large development projects have begun in and around the city. An
important part of the ASEZA goals is the relocation of the main port
further from the city, which could have dramatic impacts on the
fisheries of the northern gulf.

\subsubsection{Aqaba marine park}\label{aqaba-marine-park}

The Aqaba marine park was established in 1997 as a protected area,
covering 7km of coastline 350m into the water. The park has different
zones that allow for various levels of access, with some opened to
public recreation and others closed except to permitted researchers. All
zones of the park are closed to fishing, because of the presences of
coral reef ecosystems in the area. The park is commonly used for diving,
and about 80\% of marine recreation in Aqaba takes place in the park.

\subsection{Efforts performed for fishing in the red
sea}\label{efforts-performed-for-fishing-in-the-red-sea}

\subsection{Strategic direction of
Aqaba}\label{strategic-direction-of-aqaba}

ASEZA has outlined a master plan for future zoning of the locations in
and around the city of Aqaba. In addition to the relocation mentioned
above of the main port, new zones will be created for tourism,
residential life, and heavy industry. The goal of the new coastal
residential areas is to consolidate more scattered development, to
reduce the spread of marine damage. Similarly, the industrial zone will
be placed near the Saudi Arabian border, separated topographically from
the coastal developments. Transportation infrastructure is also being
constructed to increase access, chiefly through the expansion of the
airport as well as the shift from industrial to personal transport at
ports near the city.

\subparagraph{Page Break}\label{page-break-2}

\section{Methods}\label{methods}

Mapping --- identification of fishing areas\\
Semi-structured Questionnaire

\begin{enumerate}
\def\labelenumi{\arabic{enumi}.}
\tightlist
\item
  Fishermen
\item
  Local and touristic Restaurants
\end{enumerate}

Socio-economic survey\\
Database establishment

The data gathered by JREDS between November 2014 and November 2015 is
the first continuous data collection effort to cover nearly the entire
commercial fishing operation in Aqaba. Data on landings, species, gear
and fishing area are collected by questionnaires directly from the
fishermen in the harbor (Appendix 1). The questionnaires have been
developed by referencing those used by the FAO for the project
â\euro{}œScientific and Institutional Cooperation to Support Responsible
Fisheries in the Eastern Mediterranean â\euro{}`` EastMedâ\euro{} in
Egypt and Lebanon. The collected data include the date, duration,
location, the fishing method used and the estimated weight and number of
the catch by species. The data is stored in a specially developed
database hosted by JREDS and is regularly analyzed for misreporting and
false entries. All catch is documented by pictures, so misidentification
of species can be easily recognized.

\subparagraph{Page Break}\label{page-break-3}

\section{Results}\label{results}

\subsection{Fishing Areas}\label{fishing-areas}

In order to determine the most active fishing areas in the Jordanian
part of the Gulf of Aqaba, fishermen were surveyed upon return to shore.
Each fisherman indicated what location he had gone to that day, and the
results were aggregated to determine what places were most popular.
Figure 1 displays the locations, while figure 2 displays their relative
activity. The most popular locations were the Old Power Station and the
nearby Container Port, with 1091 (32\% of total) and `1006 (29\% of
total) trips respectively. These locations indicated are known to have
biotic, soft floors, along with seagrass beds and algal communities
(Al-Zibdah, Khalaf, and Odat 2006). The fishermen tend to stay near the
city, with few trips taking place in areas closer to the southern
border.

Catch Per Unit Effort (CPUE) was calculated for each fishing area, where
\(\text{CPUE}=\frac{\text{Kg. of Fish}}{\text{Number of Trips}}\) per
area.

While the CPUE for each location does appear to have a positive
relationship with activity, the correlation is not very strong. We
expect that for every increase of 1kg of catch per unit effort in an
area, trips to that location will be multiplied by 1.11. However, this
only accounts for roughly 19\% of the variation in activity for the
regions.

In general, the fishermen have no access to fishing waters outside
Jordan. Even inside Jordanâ\euro{}™s boundaries, large areas are closed
to fishing. For example, fishing is prohibited within 350 meters of the
shore along the 4-km coast containing the Aqaba Marine Park area;
fishing is also banned within 500 m of the port areas as well as south
of the Tala Bay resort. Consequently, more than 65\% of all fishing
operations concentrate on three fishing areas off the coast.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics{aqabamapsmall.png}
\caption{Figure 1}
\end{figure}

\includegraphics{C:/Users/nealv/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpolQI0A/file86103eee1600_files/figure-latex/fishing_area-1.pdf}
Figure 2

\includegraphics{C:/Users/nealv/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpolQI0A/file86103eee1600_files/figure-latex/unnamed-chunk-1-1.pdf}
Figure 3

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}lrrrr@{}}
\toprule
& Estimate & Std. Error & t value &
Pr(\textgreater{}\textbar{}t\textbar{})\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Intercept & 1.7393060 & 1.2783495 & 1.360587 & 0.2008705\tabularnewline
ln(\emph{CPUE}) & 0.1002301 & 0.0623748 & 1.606902 &
0.1363769\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

\emph{R\textsuperscript{2} = 0.1901126}

Table 1

\subsection{Fishing Gear}\label{fishing-gear}

Overall, 84\% of fishing trips used lines as part of their equipment,
compared to 21\% for nets and 6\% for cages. Of the major fishing areas
(\textgreater{}50 trips during the time period) only Gandour had
significantly less line usage (at 15\%) along with the Container Port
(at 82\%.) 32\% of all fishing trips returned with no catch. That number
is 32\% for trips using lines, but jumps to 61\% for nets and 45\% for
cages (Figure 3).

Controlling for fishing location, both cages and nets are correlated
with less catch weight, with cages seeing a change of -15.73kg
{[}(-22.97, -8.49), p = 0.000021{]} and nets seeing a change of -7.34kg
{[}(-11.03, -3.65), p = 0.000097{]} respectively. This suggests that
lines are more effective than other gear for total catch weight,
providing a possible reason for their overwhelming usage over nets and
cages.

By looking at the breakdown of which species are targeted by each
method, we can also see a difference in the use cases of each type of
gear. Nets are used to target small fish, such as those belonging to the
Carangidae, Clupeidae, and Caesionidae families, where large numbers but
low total weights are caught. Meanwhile, lines are used to capture
larger fish, like those in the Scombridae, Xiphiidae, Istiophoridae
families, along with the Chondrichthyes. Cages were used more sparingly,
mostly for fish in the Siganidae family.

\includegraphics{C:/Users/nealv/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpolQI0A/file86103eee1600_files/figure-latex/gear_results-1.pdf}
Figure 4

\includegraphics{C:/Users/nealv/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpolQI0A/file86103eee1600_files/figure-latex/unnamed-chunk-3-1.pdf}

\subsection{Species}\label{species}

In total, information from 3452 fishing trips was collected and
analyzed. The grand total catch from December 01, 2014 to November 30,
2015 was 80522 kg, made up of fffffff. Of all the fishing trips, 32\%
caught no fish. The most abundant family in terms of number was
Carangidae, with 37649 individuals caught (42\%,) followed by Clupeidae
with 21720 (24\%,) together making up 66\% of all specimens caught.
However, they make up a much smaller portion of the total catch weight
over the period, at 10122kg (12.6\%) and 1310kg (1.6\%) respectively, or
14.2\% together. Instead, a majority of the total catch weight was made
up of Scombridae with 41618kg (52\%) followed by Xiphiidae with 18955kg
(24\%) making up 75\% together.

A total of 11432 kg of Sardines and Sardine-like species were caught in
250 trips. Of these, 7757 kg (68\%) were caught opposite to the
container port. A total of 41618 kg of tuna species were caught, in 881
trips. The total catch for swordfish was 18955kg, 5005kg for sailfish,
and 1966kg for sharks. In contrast, the local populations of reef fish
species are making up only a small part of the catch (under 1\% each),
less than 1600 Kg per year.

11448kg of fish were caught in November, of which 8311kg (73\%) were
Tuna species, and 692kg (6\%) were sardine species. 5919kg of fish were
caught in December, of which 3761kg (64\%) were Tuna species, and 694kg
(12\%) were sardine species. 2303kg of fish were caught in May, of which
1330kg (58\%) were Tuna species, and 463kg (20\%) were sardine species.
9813kg of fish were caught in October, of which 7113kg (72\%) were Tuna
species, and 53kg (1\%) were sardine species. 15934kg of fish were
caught in January, of which 11390kg (71\%) were Tuna species, and 3479kg
(22\%) were sardine species. 5518kg of fish were caught in February, of
which 3162kg (57\%) were Tuna species, and 1817kg (33\%) were sardine
species. 1577kg of fish were caught in June, of which 0kg (0\%) were
Tuna species, and 67kg (4\%) were sardine species. 6741kg of fish were
caught in August, of which 540kg (8\%) were Tuna species, and 544kg
(8\%) were sardine species. 4352kg of fish were caught in April, of
which 2854kg (66\%) were Tuna species, and 1052kg (24\%) were sardine
species. 5664kg of fish were caught in September, of which 1423kg (25\%)
were Tuna species, and 225kg (4\%) were sardine species. 3935kg of fish
were caught in March, of which 1684kg (43\%) were Tuna species, and
1905kg (48\%) were sardine species. 7318kg of fish were caught in July,
of which 50kg (1\%) were Tuna species, and 441kg (6\%) were sardine
species.

\includegraphics{C:/Users/nealv/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpolQI0A/file86103eee1600_files/figure-latex/heatmap-1.pdf}

\subsection{Time}\label{time}

Trips are more frequent during the winter, which corresponds to the
months where trips are most likely to be successful. However, the
relationship with CPUE and month is less direct, which is highest in the
late fall and in January. Trips are most frequent on Mondays and drop
drastically on Fridays and Saturdays. The distribution of trip returns
range from 11 am to midnight, with peaks times of 1 pm and 7 pm.

\includegraphics{C:/Users/nealv/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpolQI0A/file86103eee1600_files/figure-latex/Time Plot-1.pdf}

\includegraphics{C:/Users/nealv/AppData/Local/Temp/RtmpolQI0A/file86103eee1600_files/figure-latex/p succesful-1.pdf}

\subparagraph{Page Break}\label{page-break-4}

\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}

\subsection{Fisheries and stock
status}\label{fisheries-and-stock-status}

As the data from the fisheries itself does not yet allow for a
comprehensive assessment of the stock size and fishing status, these
properties must be estimated from other sources. For the pelagic species
which make up the majority of the catch, it can be assumed that no
separate Jordanian population exists and that they are part of the
broader Red Sea stock. Additionally, the swordfish caught in Jordan are
most likely part of the Indian Ocean stock. The Indian Ocean swordfish
is currently not overfished, and the biomass is close to the maximum
sustainable yield threshold (BMSY).

According to earlier investigations, the tuna catch mostly consists of
three species. The most common are the Skipjack (\emph{Katsuwonis
pelamis}) and the Kawakawa (\emph{Euthynnus affinis}). Minor catches
consist of Yellowfin tuna (\emph{Thunnus albacares}), Dogtooth tuna
(\emph{Gymnosarda unicolor}) and Longtail tuna (\emph{Thunnus tonggol})
(Al-Zibdeh 2007). All of the tuna are taken from a larger migrating
population, of which only a small part migrates to Jordan. The sardines
and mackerels, which form another important component of the catch, are
also most likely part of a bigger population in the Red Sea and not a
local fish stock. Separate stock assessments for these species in the
Red Sea do not yet exist.

In contrast to the most important commercially fished species, which are
migratory and pelagic, the reef fish species which make only a small
part of the landings are local populations. Although the gathered data
does not yet allow for an estimation of stock size and fishing status,
first conclusions can be drawn from ReefCheck Surveys, carried out by
the Aqaba Marine Park during the PERSGA project in 2008 and by JREDS in
2015. These surveys focus on indicator species to give a rough
estimation of important reef fish populations.

The snapper was selected as an indicator species because of its
importance as a culinary fish that is caught by nets near reefs. Average
snapper abundance for the whole region was 22.4A±19.34 fish per 100
m\textsuperscript{2} reef, but no snappers were found in Jordan in 2006,
2008 (PERSGA 2010) and 2015 (JREDS 2015).

Parrotfish were selected as an indicator of over-fishing of various
kinds. Between 1.25 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2} reef (PERSGA 2010)
and 1.8 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2} reef (JREDS 2015) were found in
surveys of the area. This is lower than in Egypt (2.13 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2} reef) and Saudi Arabia (2.24 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2} reef) (PERSGA 2010).

Butterflyfish of the family Chaetodontidae are taken as indicators for
over-fishing (they are often bycatch in reef fisheries), ornamental fish
trade and reef health. In Jordan, around 6.88A±1.24 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2} were counted in 2006 and 2008 (PERSGA 2010)(Kotb
2010) and 8.9A±1.33 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2} (JREDS 2015), lower
than in the Indo-Pacific region (10 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2}
reef) and Indonesia (18 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2} reef). The
abundances in Egypt were lower (6.23A±0.69 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2}) and in Saudi Arabia were higher (8.22A±0.36
fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2}) (PERSGA 2010)(Kotb 2010). The
abundance of Chaetodontid was reported as 11.75 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2} reef in 5m depth and 10.40 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2} reef in 1981 (Bouchon-Navaro
1981)({\textbf{???}}).

Sweetlips (\emph{Haemulidae}) were taken as an indicator for
overfishing, as they are one of the most popular fish species. In the
Indo-Pacific, \textless{}1 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2} were found,
in Indonesia around four fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2}. No sweetlips
were found during any surveys in Jordan. 0.64A±0.07 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2} were found in Egypt and 1.09A±0.03 fish per
100m\textsuperscript{2} in Saudi Arabia (PERSGA 2010)(Kotb 2010).

Grouper above a 30cm length of any species serve as an indicator for
overfishing of all types. Jordan has very low values at 0.25A±0.12 fish
per 100m\textsuperscript{2}(PERSGA 2010) (Kotb 2010) in 2006 and 2008;
no grouper were found in the 2015 survey (JREDS 2015). This is in
contrast to Egypt with 0.75A±0.35 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2} and
Saudi Arabia with 1.03A±0.20 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2}. The
recorded abundance from Red Sea reefs during 1997-2001 (average:
1.15A±1.3 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2}) and from the Indo-Pacific
region was much higher (0.45A±0.98 fish per 100m\textsuperscript{2})
(PERSGA 2010) (Kotb 2010).

The results of the surveys suggest that the local reef fish populations
are heavily overfished. This is supported by the findings of the current
fisheries data collection, which shows that for the first time about
33\% of the fishermen come back from the sea without any catch.

Annual fish production in Jordan is also highly variable. Previous
research has shown that production in 1999 was 450 metric tons, while
production in 1998 comprised 120 metric tons (Kotb 2010). 2015 saw a
production of 80.5 metric tons, smaller than in previous years on
record. Previous studies also do not indicate the major presence of
Swordfish (Xiphiidae) in the Jordanian catch (Al-Zibdah, Khalaf, and
Odat 2006), yet currently, Xiphiidae make up 23.5\% of the catch weight.
Meanwhile, the share of tuna has dropped from 60.3\% in 1999/2000 to 52
in 2015 (Al-Zibdah, Khalaf, and Odat 2006).

\section{Recommendations}\label{recommendations}

\subsection{Recommendations for
Management}\label{recommendations-for-management}

\subsection{Recommendations for Public Awareness and
Education}\label{recommendations-for-public-awareness-and-education}

\subsection{Recommendations for
Research}\label{recommendations-for-research}

\subparagraph{Page Break}\label{page-break-5}

\section{Appendix I - Table of
Species}\label{appendix-i---table-of-species}

\begin{longtable}[]{@{}llrrrrr@{}}
\toprule
Common Name & Scientific Name (If Available) & Family & Weight (kg) & \%
of Total & Number Caught & \% of Total\tabularnewline
\midrule
\endhead
Amberjack & Seriola spp. & Carangidae & 70 & 0.09 & 7 &
0.01\tabularnewline
Barracuda & Sphyraena spp. & Sphyraenidae & 8 & 0.01 & 2 &
0.00\tabularnewline
Blacktip Grouper & Epinephelus fasciatus & Serranidae & 8 & 0.01 & 27 &
0.03\tabularnewline
Blue Skinned Seabream & Polysteganus coeruleopunctatus & Sparidae & 170
& 0.21 & 617 & 0.69\tabularnewline
Bluespotted Cornetfish & Fistularia commersonii & Fistulariidea & 4 &
0.00 & 7 & 0.01\tabularnewline
Calmar Squid & Sepioteuthis lessoniana & Loliginidae & 66 & 0.08 & 15 &
0.02\tabularnewline
Common Dolphinfish & Coryphaena hippurus & Carangidae & 447 & 0.56 & 99
& 0.11\tabularnewline
Common Silver Body & Gerres oyena & Gerreidae & 5 & 0.01 & 35 &
0.04\tabularnewline
Dogtooth Tuna & Gymnosarda unicolor & Scombridae & 75 & 0.09 & 10 &
0.01\tabularnewline
Goatfish & Parupeneus spp. & Mullidae & 164 & 0.20 & 1795 &
2.00\tabularnewline
Goggle Eye & Priacanthus hamrur & Priacanthidae & 4 & 0.00 & 35 &
0.04\tabularnewline
Grouper & Variola louti & Serranidae & 213 & 0.26 & 616 &
0.69\tabularnewline
Indian Scad & Decapterus russelli & Carangidae & 5 & 0.01 & 50 &
0.06\tabularnewline
Lizardfish & NA & Synodontidae & 4 & 0.00 & 2 & 0.00\tabularnewline
Longtail Tuna & Thunnus tonggol & Scombridae & 150 & 0.19 & 16 &
0.02\tabularnewline
Mackerel Scad & Decapterus macarellus & Carangidae & 9569 & 11.88 &
37487 & 41.76\tabularnewline
Marbled Spinefoot & Siganus rivulatus & Siganidae & 243 & 0.30 & 2644 &
2.95\tabularnewline
Narrowbarred Spanish Mackarel & Scomberomorus commerson & Scombridae &
40 & 0.05 & 4 & 0.00\tabularnewline
Orange-spotted Jack & Carangoides bajad & Carangidae & 29 & 0.04 & 5 &
0.01\tabularnewline
Parrotfish & Scarus spp. & Scaridae & 42 & 0.05 & 308 &
0.34\tabularnewline
Pomfrette & Taractichthys steindachneri & Bramidae & 119 & 0.15 & 40 &
0.04\tabularnewline
Round Herring & Etrumeus teres & Clupeidae & 808 & 1.00 & 14860 &
16.55\tabularnewline
Sailfish & Istiophorus spp. & Istiophoridae & 5005 & 6.22 & 1452 &
1.62\tabularnewline
Sardine & Herklotsichthys quadrimaculatus & Clupeidae & 502 & 0.62 &
6860 & 7.64\tabularnewline
Shark & NA & Chondrichthyes & 1966 & 2.44 & 783 & 0.87\tabularnewline
Snake Mackerel & Thyrsitoides spp. & Gempylidae & 88 & 0.11 & 51 &
0.06\tabularnewline
Soldierfish & NA & Holocentridae & 86 & 0.11 & 843 & 0.94\tabularnewline
Spangled Emperor & Lethrinus nebulosus & Lethrinidae & 52 & 0.06 & 89 &
0.10\tabularnewline
Swordfish & Xiphias gladius & Xiphiidae & 18955 & 23.54 & 4888 &
5.44\tabularnewline
Tuna & NA & Scombridae & 40212 & 49.94 & 9133 & 10.17\tabularnewline
Unicorn Fish & Naso spp. & Acanthuridae & 2 & 0.00 & 1 &
0.00\tabularnewline
Variegated Emperor & Lethrinus variegatus & Lethrinidae & 55 & 0.07 &
246 & 0.27\tabularnewline
Yellowfin Tuna & Thunnus albacares & Scombridae & 1141 & 1.42 & 63 &
0.07\tabularnewline
Yellowspotted Jack & Carangoides fulvoguttatus & Carangidae & 2 & 0.00 &
1 & 0.00\tabularnewline
Yellowtail Fusilier & Caesio spp. & Caesionidae & 213 & 0.26 & 6685 &
7.45\tabularnewline
\bottomrule
\end{longtable}

Total Number of Unique Species Identified: 33

\subparagraph{Page Break}\label{page-break-6}

\subsection*{References}\label{references}
\addcontentsline{toc}{subsection}{References}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\hypertarget{ref-RN18}{}
Al-Zibdah, Mohammed, and Nidal Odat. 2007. ``Fishery Status, Growth,
Reproduction Biology and Feeding Habit of Two Scombrid Fish from the
Gulf of Aqaba, Red Sea.'' Journal Article. \emph{Lebanese Science
Journal} 8 (2).

\hypertarget{ref-RN28}{}
Al-Zibdah, Mohammed, Maroof Khalaf, and Nidal Odat. 2006. ``The Fishery
Status in Jordan's Gulf of Aqaba, Red Sea.'' Journal Article.
\emph{Dirasat: Pure Sciences} 33 (1): 127--42.

\hypertarget{ref-RN35}{}
Bouchon-Navaro, Y., and M. L. Harmelin-Vivien. 1981. ``Quantitative
Distribution of Herbivorous Reef Fishes in the Gulf of Aqaba (Red
Sea).'' Journal Article. \emph{Marine Biology} 63 (1): 79--86.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.1007/bf00394665}{10.1007/bf00394665}.

\hypertarget{ref-RN15}{}
FAO. 2003. ``Fisheries Fao.'' Journal Article.

\hypertarget{ref-RN9}{}
Khalaf, Maroof. 2004. ``Fish Fauna of the Jordanian Coast, Gulf of
Aqaba, Red Sea.'' Journal Article. \emph{JKAU: Marine Science} 15.

\hypertarget{ref-RN8}{}
Khalaf, Maroof A., Saber Al-Rousan, and Fuad A. Al-Horani. 2012. ``Fish
Assemblages in Seagrass Habitat Along the Jordanian Coast of the Gulf of
Aqaba.'' Journal Article. \emph{Natural Science} 04 (08): 517--25.
doi:\href{https://doi.org/10.4236/ns.2012.48069}{10.4236/ns.2012.48069}.

\hypertarget{ref-RN29}{}
Kotb, Dr. Mohammed M.A. 2010. ``The Status of Coral Reefs in the Red Sea
and Gulf of Aden: 2009.'' Report. The Regional Organization for the
Conservation of the Environment of the Red Sea; Gulf of Aden (PERSGA).

\hypertarget{ref-RN34}{}
Tellawi, Dr. Abdelmuti M. 2001. ``First National Report of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan on the Implementation of Article 6 of the Convention
on Biological Diversity.'' Report. The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.


\end{document}
